Document DAML on SQL (#6850)
digital-asset/daml: ledger/daml-on-sql/README.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2020 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

> DAML-on-SQL

Reviewer: I think the product names are always without dashes.
```suggestion
DAML on SQL
```
Not sure if we should or should not always italicize _DAML on SQL_ to emphasize it as a reference to the product.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

###########

DAML-on-SQL is a PostgreSQL-based DAML ledger implementation.

Setup PostgreSQL and run
************************

Before starting, you need to perform the following steps:

- create an initially empty PostgresSQL database that DAML-on-SQL can access
- have a database user for DAML-on-SQL that has authority to execute DDL operations

This is because DAML-on-SQL manages its own database schema,
applying migrations if necessary when upgrading versions.

To specify the PostgreSQL instance you wish to connect, use the
``--sql-backend-jdbcurl <value>`` command line option, where ``<value>``
is a valid JDBC URL containing the username, password and database
name to connect to.

Here is an example for such a URL: ``jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test?user=fred&password=secret``

Due to possible conflicts between the ``&`` character and various terminal
shells, we recommend quoting the JDBC URL like so:

.. code-block:: none

>   $ java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar Main.dar --sql-backend-jdbcurl 'jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test?user=fred&password=secret'

Reviewer: Let's decouple managing the the daml on sql process from the "deployment" of DAR packages.
```suggestion
  $ java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar --sql-backend-jdbcurl 'jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test?user=fred&password=secret'
```

Architecture and availability
*****************************

Processes and components
========================

The core processes necessary to run a DAML-on-SQL deployment are:

- the JVM-hosted standalone Ledger API server and
- the PostgreSQL server used to persist the ledger data.

The Ledger API server communicates with the external world via the gRPC
Ledger API and communicates with PostgreSQL via JDBC to persist transactions,
keep track of active contracts, store compiled DAML packages, and so on.

Core architecture considerations
================================

A very important point to make is that the backing PostgreSQL server performs a
lot of work which is both CPU- and IO-intensive: all (valid) Ledger API requests
will eventually hit the database. At the same time, the Ledger API server has to
have available resources to validate requests, evaluate commands and prepare responses.
While the PostgreSQL schema is designed to be as efficient as possible, practical
experience has shown that having **dedicated computation and memory resources for the
two core components** (the Ledger API server and the PostgreSQL server) allows the two

> to run interfering as little as possible with each other. Depending on the kind of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to run without interfering with each other. Depending on the kind of
```

deployment you wish to make, this can be achieved with containerization, virtualization

> or simply using physically different machines. Still, the Ledger API communicates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or simply using physically different machines. Still, DAML on SQL communicates
```

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

abundantly with the PostgreSQL server and many Ledger API requests need to go all
the way to persist information on the database. To reduce the latency necessary to
serve outstanding requests, **the Ledger API server and PostgreSQL server should be
physically co-located**.

Core availability considerations
================================

In order to address availability concerns, it's important to understand what each of the
core components do and how they interact with each other, in particular regarding state
and consistency.

> In DAML-on-SQL, the Ledger API server holds important state that affects the offset

Reviewer: I'm not sure the details about why a multi-participant deployment for DAML on SQL doesn't work are necessary to convey that only a single DAML on SQL process should be connected at the same time to a particular postgres schema.

Author: I'm not telling any detail. I'm just providing a relatively vague motivation (state-dependent behavior) regarding why it's important to have a single DAML on SQL instances running atop a single PostgreSQL database. I can remove the reasoning, but I'm not sure that would effectively tell users that there are inherent dangers in ending up with two active DAML on SQL instances interacting with a single PostgreSQL installation.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

assigned to each transaction. This effectively means that having two Ledger API servers
running on top of a single PostgreSQL server can lead to duplicated and inconsistent
offsets, effectively leading to undefined (and likely broken) behavior. For this reason,
it's important to maintain a strict 1:1 relationship between a running Ledger API server
and a running PostgreSQL server. Note that using PostgreSQL in a high-availability
configuration does not allow you to run additional Ledger API servers.

Downtime for the Ledger API server can be minimized using a watchdog or orchestration
system taking care of evaluating its health of the core components and ensuring its
availability. The Ledger API implementation of DAML-on-SQL exposes the standard gRPC
health checkpoint that can be used to evaluate the health status of the Ledger API

> component. More information on the endpoint can be found at the documentation for gRPC.

Reviewer: Putting a link here would be very helpful.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

Security and privacy
********************

Trust assumptions
=================

In DAML-on-SQL, all data is kept centrally by the operator of the deployment.
Thus, it's their responsibility to ensure that the data is treated with the
appropriate care so to respect confidentiality and the applicable regulations.

The ledger operator is advised to use the tools available to them to not divulge
private user data, including those documented by PostgreSQL, to protect data at
rest and using a secure communication channel between the Ledger API server and
the PostgreSQL server.

Ledger API over TLS
===================

> To protect data on-the-wire and allow using the Ledger API over untrusted networks,

Reviewer: I think the terms are _data at rest_ and _data in transit_.
```suggestion
To protect data in transit and allow using the Ledger API over untrusted networks,
```

the DAML-on-SQL Ledger API server implementation leverages gRPC's built-in TLS support
to allow clients to verify the server's identity and encrypt the communication channel
over which the Ledger API requests and responses are sent.

To enable TLS, you need to specify the private key for your server and the certificate
chain via ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar --pem server.pem --crt server.crt``.
By default, DAML-on-SQL requires client authentication as well. You can set a custom root
CA certificate used to validate client certificates via ``--cacrt ca.crt``. You can
change the client authentication mode via ``--client-auth none`` which will disable it
completely, ``--client-auth optional`` which makes it optional or specify the default
explicitly via ``--client-auth require``.

Ledger API Authorization
========================

By default, DAML-on-SQL accepts all valid Ledger API requests.

DAML-on-SQL allows to enable authorization, representing claims as defined by the
`Ledger API authorization documentation <https://docs.daml.com/app-dev/authentication.html#authentication-claims>`__
using the `JWT <https://jwt.io/>`__ format.

> The following command line options are available to enable authentication:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command line options are available to enable authorization:
```

Generating RSA keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To generate RSA keys for testing purposes, use the following command

.. code-block:: none

  openssl req -nodes -new -x509 -keyout ledger.key -out ledger.crt

which generates the following files:

- ``ledger.key``: the private key in PEM/DER/PKCS#1 format
- ``ledger.crt``: a self-signed certificate containing the public key, in PEM/DER/X.509 Certificate format

Generating EC keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To generate keys to be used with ES256 for testing purposes, use the following command

.. code-block:: none

  openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 3650 -newkey ec:<(openssl ecparam -name prime256v1) -keyout ecdsa256.key -out ecdsa256.crt

which generates the following files:

- ``ecdsa256.key``: the private key in PEM/DER/PKCS#1 format
- ``ecdsa256.crt``: a self-signed certificate containing the public key, in PEM/DER/X.509 Certificate format

Similarly, you can use the following command for ES512 keys:

.. code-block:: none

  openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 3650 -newkey ec:<(openssl ecparam -name secp521r1) -keyout ecdsa512.key -out ecdsa512.crt

Command-line reference
**********************

> To start DAML-on-SQL, run: ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar [options] <archive>...``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start DAML-on-SQL, run: ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar [options] ``.
```
I hadn't thought about

To see all the available options, run ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar --help``.

Monitoring
**********

Enable and configure reporting
==============================

To enable metrics and configure reporting, you can use the two following CLI options:

- ``--metrics-reporter``: passing a legal value will enable reporting; the accepted values
  are as follows:

  - ``console``: prints captured metrics to standard output

  - ``csv://</path/to/metrics.csv>``: saves the captured metrics in CSV format at the specified location

>   - ``graphite://<server_host>[:<server_port>]``: sends captured metrics to a Graphite server. If the port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ``graphite://<server_host>[:<server_port>][/<metric_prefix>]``: sends captured metrics to a Graphite server. If the port
```

>     is omitted, the default value ``2003`` will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    is omitted, the default value ``2003`` will be used. A ``metric_prefix`` can be specified, causing all metrics to be reported with the specified prefix.
```

.. Copyright (c) 2020 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

DAML-on-SQL
###########

DAML-on-SQL is a PostgreSQL-based DAML ledger implementation.

Setup PostgreSQL and run
************************

Before starting, you need to perform the following steps:

- create an initially empty PostgresSQL database that DAML-on-SQL can access
- have a database user for DAML-on-SQL that has authority to execute DDL operations

This is because DAML-on-SQL manages its own database schema,
applying migrations if necessary when upgrading versions.

To specify the PostgreSQL instance you wish to connect, use the
``--sql-backend-jdbcurl <value>`` command line option, where ``<value>``
is a valid JDBC URL containing the username, password and database
name to connect to.

Here is an example for such a URL: ``jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test?user=fred&password=secret``

Due to possible conflicts between the ``&`` character and various terminal
shells, we recommend quoting the JDBC URL like so:

.. code-block:: none

>   $ java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar Main.dar --sql-backend-jdbcurl "jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test?user=fred&password=secret"

Reviewer 2: I recommend using single quotes when no string interpolation or escaping is required.

```suggestion
  $ java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar Main.dar --sql-backend-jdbcurl 'jdbc:postgresql://localhost/test?user=fred&password=secret'
```

> If you're not familiar with JDBC URLs, see the PostgreSQL JDBC docs for more information: https://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/connect.html

Reviewer 2: Can you use an RST link for this?

Reviewer 3: Rst will turn this into a link automatically. You only need a link if you want a different text.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/b9f12152db407dc5dcb94304c8eaea893f5e749a

Architecture and availability
*****************************

Processes and components
========================

The core processes necessary to run a DAML-on-SQL deployment are:

> - the JVM-hosted standalone Ledger API server and

Reviewer 2: I think we can probably refer to this as the "ledger server", as it's more than just the ledger API: it's the ledger itself, the ledger API, and the index.

Author: That is an implementation detail, I don't think we should commit to it in the docs.

Reviewer: I think we should refer to the process as _DAML on SQL_ instead of _Ledger API Server_, _Participant Server_, or _Ledger Server_. All of the latter ones are implementation details.

Instead of `JVM-hosted` I think the docs could explicitly state which JVM version DAML on SQL is tested with and that this particular version is the minimum requirement and that other versions could work as well.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f57199d0811464e1f0c13d7b9bd3a98f5873cd7a

and a running PostgreSQL server. Note that using PostgreSQL in a high-availability
configuration does not allow you to run additional Ledger API servers.

Downtime for the Ledger API server can be minimized using a watchdog or orchestration
system taking care of evaluating its health of the core components and ensuring its
availability. The Ledger API implementation of DAML-on-SQL exposes the standard gRPC
health checkpoint that can be used to evaluate the health status of the Ledger API
component. More information on the endpoint can be found at the documentation for gRPC.

Security and privacy
********************

Trust assumptions
=================

In DAML-on-SQL, all data is kept centrally by the operator of the deployment.
Thus, it's their responsibility to ensure that the data is treated with the
appropriate care so to respect confidentiality and the applicable regulations.

The ledger operator is advised to use the tools available to them to not divulge
private user data, including those documented by PostgreSQL, to protect data at
rest and using a secure communication channel between the Ledger API server and
the PostgreSQL server.

> Ledger API over TLS

Reviewer 2: This section and a few below it seem to be relevant to any ledger API, not just DAML-on-SQL. Can we not just point to the relevant pages in the documentation (and improve them with the text below)?

Author: The JWT part is DAML-on-SQL specific, the rest is copy-pasted from the SDK docs. I'll link the definition of claims and preserve the reset.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/2572ef91318bfa499ef48ab21865fe48fb48638d

the DAML-on-SQL Ledger API server implementation leverages gRPC's built-in TLS support
to allow clients to verify the server's identity and encrypt the communication channel
over which the Ledger API requests and responses are sent.

To enable TLS, you need to specify the private key for your server and the certificate
chain via ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar --pem server.pem --crt server.crt``.
By default, DAML-on-SQL requires client authentication as well. You can set a custom root
CA certificate used to validate client certificates via ``--cacrt ca.crt``. You can
change the client authentication mode via ``--client-auth none`` which will disable it
completely, ``--client-auth optional`` which makes it optional or specify the default
explicitly via ``--client-auth require``.

Ledger API Authentication
=========================

By default, DAML-on-SQL does not use any authentication and accepts all valid Ledger API requests.

To start DAML-on-SQL with authentication based on `JWT <https://jwt.io/>`__ tokens,
use one of the following command line options:

- ``--auth-jwt-rs256-crt=<filename>``.

>   \DAML-on-SQL will expect all tokens to be signed with RS256 (RSA Signature with SHA-256) with the public key loaded from the given X.509 certificate file.

Reviewer 2: What does the `\` at the start of the line do?

Author: It's a literary device that I often use to confuse people when copying and pasting text. :smile:

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/9b2bfdd6d54ce32d0e2bb17c994cd1afb64ba3bb

>   \DAML-on-SQL will expect all tokens to be signed with RS256 (RSA Signature with SHA-256) with the public key loaded from the given X.509 certificate file.

Reviewer 2: Can you wrap these lines as you have above?

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/f6b1b2bbca8954d80ae4202d39692c4fe64a1a26

  Both PEM-encoded certificates (text files starting with ``-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----``)
  and DER-encoded certificates (binary files) are supported.

- ``--auth-jwt-es256-crt=<filename>``.
  DAML-on-SQL will expect all tokens to be signed with ES256 (ECDSA using P-256 and SHA-256) with the public key loaded from the given X.509 certificate file.
  Both PEM-encoded certificates (text files starting with ``-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----``)
  and DER-encoded certicates (binary files) are supported.

- ``--auth-jwt-es512-crt=<filename>``.
  DAML-on-SQL will expect all tokens to be signed with ES512 (ECDSA using P-521 and SHA-512)     with the public key loaded from the given X.509 certificate file.
  Both PEM-encoded certificates (text files starting with ``-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----``)
  and DER-encoded certificates (binary files) are supported.

- ``--auth-jwt-rs256-jwks=<url>``.
  DAML-on-SQL will expect all tokens to be signed with RS256 (RSA Signature with SHA-256) with the public key loaded from the given `JWKS <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7517>`__ URL.

.. warning::

>   For testing purposes only, the following options may also be used.

Reviewer 2: There's one option. No need to get plural.

Author: Addressed by https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/6850/commits/55f9b613c1f18b0d6d8b752f682ba23741599f89

- ``ledger.crt``: a self-signed certificate containing the public key, in PEM/DER/X.509 Certificate format

Generating EC keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To generate keys to be used with ES256 for testing purposes, use the following command

.. code-block:: none

  openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 3650 -newkey ec:<(openssl ecparam -name prime256v1) -keyout ecdsa256.key -out ecdsa256.crt

which generates the following files:

- ``ecdsa256.key``: the private key in PEM/DER/PKCS#1 format
- ``ecdsa256.crt``: a self-signed certificate containing the public key, in PEM/DER/X.509 Certificate format

Similarly, you can use the following command for ES512 keys:

.. code-block:: none

  openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 3650 -newkey ec:<(openssl ecparam -name secp521r1) -keyout ecdsa512.key -out ecdsa512.crt

Command-line reference
**********************

To start DAML-on-SQL, run: ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar [options] <archive>...``.

To see all the available options, run ``java -jar daml-on-sql-<version>.jar --help``.

Monitoring
**********

Enable and configure reporting
==============================

To enable metrics and configure reporting, you can use the two following CLI options:

> - ``--metrics-reporter``: passing a legal value will enable reporting; the accepted values
>   are ``console``, ``csv:</path/to/metrics.csv>`` and ``graphite:<local_server_port>``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``--metrics-reporter``: passing a legal value will enable reporting; the accepted values
  are as follows:
```

>   - ``console``: prints captured metrics on the standard output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - ``console``: prints captured metrics to standard output
```

Reviewer 2: Worth checking whether they go to STDOUT or STDERR.

``jvm``
-------

Under the ``jvm`` namespace there is a collection of metrics that
tracks important measurements about the JVM that DAML-on-SQL is
running on, including CPU usage, memory consumption and the
current state of threads.

DAML Ledger Model Compliance
****************************

Model conformance
=================

On top of bespoke unit and integration tests, the DAML-on-SQL is
thoroughly tested with the Ledger API Test Tool to ensure that the
implementation conforms with the DAML Ledger Model.

Performance envelope
====================

Furthermore, this implementation is regularly tested to comply
with the DAML Ledger Implementation Performance Envelope tests
with beta-level fidelity which ensure that DAML-on-SQL can:

- process transactions as large as 1 MB
- have a tail latency no greater than 1 second when issuing 20 pings
- have a throughput of 20 pings per second

.. note::

  A "ping" is a collective name for two templates used to evaluate
  the performance envelope. Each of the two templates, "Ping" and
  "Pong", have a single choice allowing the controller to create
  an instance of the complementary template, directed to the
  original sender.

> Replicate performance envelope tests
> ====================================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replicating performance envelope tests
======================================
```

Author: Nope, sorry, where possible I try to keep an instructional tone, it was a recommendation that [we got from a former employee](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8TD-20Mb_7M).

Reviewer 2: You've used "Generating" above a lot though. 😛

Reviewer: Maybe `Reproduce`?
